If I offer these two to you, who would you
pick as your favorite?
One of them is Abraham Lincoln, 16th President
of the United States, statesman, lawyer, famous
for having been a hard-working individual.
Has done much to abolish slavery.
The other is Confucius.
For far too long, we have been under the impression
that there is a connection between the word
“confusion” and the name Confucius!
No!
Not at all!
That is a word from another language, and
this guy is actually Kong Fuzi, the great
monk Kong.
A great thinker and philosopher from China,
from two thousand five hundred years ago.
Some even call him the founding father of
Chinese philosophy.
Who would you take?
As your favorite?
Namaste!
We are going to talk about stupidity and ignorance.
And, I had offered you a choice between Abraham
Lincoln and Confucius.
I did it for a specific reason.
For, Abraham Lincoln has spoken thus:- “Better
to remain silent and be thought a fool than
to speak and to remove all doubt”.
Look at what Confucius says.
He says:- “The man who asks a question is
a fool for a minute, the man who does not
ask is a fool for life.”
So, now tell me!
Who is your choice?!
Earlier in this series, in Episode — 253,
we had seen about ignoramuses.
The ones who know nothing.
The blank-slate empty-minded people.
Wondering what we are going to cover here,
that we haven’t already covered in that?!
Well, only after I launched that video did
I come across three beautiful sources of information:
Number One — Carlo Cippola, Number Two — Dietrich
Bonhoeffer, Number Three — a book called
Apprenticeship Patterns.
From these three, I am going to extract a
few nuggets that talk about stupidity and
ignorance.
Dietrich Bonhoeffer was a famous German philosopher.
Unfortunately, he died, he was executed, in
the Nazi concentration camp, for plotting
against Hitler.
He wondered how German individuals can be
so smart, so creative, so kindhearted, while
at the same time, the German mobs and groups
are perceived as so bad and debased.
After some thought, he came up with a theory
of stupidity.
Bonhoeffer’s Theory of Stupidity.
One important sentence in his theory goes
thus:- “Stupidity is so hard to fight against.
One can fight evil.
A higher force, a stronger army, a greater
power, more stamina, we can win.
But, to protest against stupidity is so hard.”
In fact, he wrote a letter to Mahatma Gandhi,
requesting his help.
“I am a Christian father, a person who preaches.
I want to understand how your thing works.
You seem to be successful.
I want to meet you.
Can I spend time with you?” were his words,
in the letter he wrote to the Mahatma.
Moving on, Mr. Carlo Cipolla.
Dietrich gave us just a Theory of Stupidity.
But, this man goes further!
He gave us five laws of stupidity.
He even published a book about it!
That… this is the cover of the book…
looks like you need to look at the word Stupidity
upside down!
Hey, did you notice the picture in the cover?
Seems to have a stone on the cover..
It struck me later, … probably Cipolla knows
Tamil?
To abolish stupidity, probably he is recommending
that one has to “Kal”..?
Learn (in Tamil)?
So, what are these five Laws?
They go like this.
The first law says, “We all make a very
big mistake of underestimating the number
of stupid people around… including, yourselves”.
We grossly underestimate.
Law Number Two:- He says, it is independent
of any other quality or aspect or personality
trait that that person has.
Irrespective of their talent, or their skin
color, or the language their speak, or their
gender, nothing matters.
She may be a Nobel prize winning scientist.
She may be stupid.
She may be a worker in a small village farm,
she may be stupid.
He may be a woodcutter.
He may be stupid.
He may be the President of a very country
in the world.
He may be stupid.
So, no connections at all.
It is an independent trait.
He has made this observation after a lot of
analysis!
Law Number Three:- Hang on.
Wait.
Will explain after this page is done!
Law Number Four says “We underestimate the
harm it can cause”.
We always seem to grossly underestimate the
amount of damage or harm stupidity can cause.
Again and again.
Again and again, we make that mistake.
And, finally, related to Law Four, he says,
Stupidity is the most dangerous adversary
for you.
If he is evil, if he is very strong, if his
heart is filled with bad thoughts, doesn’t
matter.
What is the worst thing you can find in your
adversary?
Stupidity.
What is this This Third Law?
The Third Law requires a little more explanation.
So, basically, it is that famous four-boxes
matrix.
On the x-axis, the red-and-green-horizontal-line,
starts with “Harm to others” and goes
on to “Benefits to others”.
Similarly, the vertical, y-axis, starts with
“Harm to themselves” and goes on to “Benefits
to themselves”.
So, who is the intelligent person?
The person whose actions benefits him or her,
but also benefits those around them — the
society.
I wanted to take the example of Bill Gates,
here.
Yes, he benefited a lot.
He continues to benefit.
But, what he has done, what he is doing, seems
to benefit a lot more people around him and
that is Cipolla’s definition for intelligence.
Alright.
What about those people who are focused on
benefiting themselves but actually cause harm
to others?
Classic!
They are the bandits!
The robbers!
The thieves!
The marauders!
They don’t care about you.
They are selfish.
But, they are actually possessing some kind
of intelligence.
There is third category, who actually harm
themselves.
They are useful for others.
Particularly, the bad kind of others.
They are useful.
But, they harm themselves.
Remember the term “Herd Mentality”?
They get dragged on in the direction they
are pulled.
If the next random stranger comes around and
proclaims that he is the next GodMan, they
will just switch and start following him.
Dangerous, for them.
Beneficial for that “leader”.
But, that fourth kind..
That is the definition of Stupid.
By their actions, not only do they cause harm
to others around them, they actually cause
harm to themselves too.
I have just used a random fun movie poster
here.
Dumb-Dumber — there was a movie by that
name.
In which Jim Carrey plays a pivotal role as
a complete idiot.
He would have demonstrated some very good
acting in that movie.
So, they cause harm to themselves, and to
those around them.
They are so dangerous! says the Third Law.
Now we come to that book — Apprenticeship
Patterns.
In software, what are the best practices?
How do we design software?
How do we flow the data around?
How do we interact with the user?
How do we provide the right view?
— They call these patterns.
Time-tested.
Ready solutions.
Optimised.
No need to reinvent the wheel.
Design Patterns!
In the same way, in a similar style, if you
were going to get started on your software
career as an apprentice, to learn the craft,
the craft of software, what are the best practices?
This book visualises it very well for us.
In particular, this book talks about the Dunning
Kruger Effect, elaborately.
The Dunning-Kruger Effect basically says,
if you know very little of something, usually,
you feel you know everything there is to know
about it.
The less you know about something, the more
likely you are to think that you know everything
about it.
So, if you are getting started on learning
something, knowledge doesn’t grow much,
but your confidence skyrockets already!
See that first point?
The point where the person throws the book
over his back, claiming to have read up on
everything there is to read?
That point, they call The Peak Of Mount Stupid!
You are at the highest point.
The highest point on Mount Stupid.
Only later, do you get tapped on your head.
And then, you start encountering more sources
of information and you slowly realise...
“Oh my god, there is so much more to learn!”
They call it the Valley of Despair.
You enter that!
So much more?
Still more?
This looks like a limitless ocean!
And then, and then, you start on a slope.
They call this the Slope of Enlightenment.
Slowly, gradually, things start getting clear
for you.
Oh, okay, there is so much more to learn?
Oh, okay, the fact that I am learning how
much I don’t know, and that, by itself,
is learning!
To know that I don’t know something itself,
Slowly, step by step, you go up the Slope
of Enlightenment, until you reach that final
dot, that final spot, where, probably, you
have reached a kind of plateau, a level zone,
the plateau of sustainability.
I have reached a decent level of sustainability,
and along with it, I have also gained some
humility.
I realise now, how much I don’t know!
I was laughing ridiculously, standing on the
Peak of Mount Stupid.
Now I understand how wrong I was.
That is the Dunning-Kruger Effect.
It says, the less you know about something,
the more susceptible you are to the trap of
thinking you know everything there is to know.
Okay, It wasn’t just Dunning and Kruger
who said this.
There is an Arabian proverb too.
That proverb says, “He who does not know,
and does not know that he does not know, is
a fool.
Shun him.
Okay, He who does not know, but knows that
he does not know, is a student.
Teach him.
He who knows but does not know that he knows,
is probably sleeping.
Help wake him up.
And, finally, he who knows and knows that
he knows, is enlightened!
Is a leader!
Follow him!”
Old Arabian proverb!
In the Apprenticeship Patterns book, one techie
engineer has written an autobiographical note.
This is what I told myself when I was an apprentice
at my first job.
I almost felt tempted to cut and paste it
in front of my desk, so I could see it everyday.
This is what he says he did!
Look at that sentence!
Tomorrow, I need to look stupider.
All the foolishness I was demonstrating at
work till today, … well, I need to demonstrate
even more of it from tomorrow!
And, not just demonstrate, but I need to feel
better that I am looking stupider!
There can be no more beautiful depiction of
the learner mindset!
Oh, by the way, our Thiruvalluvar, in his
844th Kural, gives us a definition for Stupidity.
Venmai Enappaduvadhu Yaathenin, Onnmai udaiyamyaam
ennum serukku.
What is Stupidity?
The arrogance that makes you think that you
are wise, is Stupidity!
How beautiful!!
Meanwhile, I just want to close with this
thought.
Remember the ostrich?
We have given it a pretty bad name.
There is this persistent myth that if somebody
chases an ostrich, and if it wants to escape,
it just stands its ground and buries its head
into the sand foolishly thinking that just
because it can’t see the outside world,
the outside world can’t see it either!
Idiot!
Stupid!
Don’t we use this analogy?
Well, please take this from me.
People have observed this ostrich.
People have done a lot of research.
And they have conclusively proved.
Nothing of that sort.
Its nest is underground.
It may even have some eggs being incubated
there.
Some chicks may have hatched too.
If somebody comes chasing, it would want to
do a quick safety check and that is what it
is doing actually.
And, we misunderstand its actions and spin
a story around it.
You tell me now.
Who is stupid!?
We will meet again on the 26th.
Thank you!